Nova Application Package Explanation
====================================

Purpose
-------

app/app.go defines App, the top-level lifecycle coordinator for a Nova
application. It owns the list of configured windows, starts native windows,
renders initial content, polls interaction events, redraws invalidated windows,
and provides a way to request shutdown.

App is intentionally a coordinator rather than a renderer or widget tree. The
window.Window type owns each window's UI state and rendering details. The
platform package creates native operating-system windows. App connects those
pieces into one application lifecycle.

Application State
-----------------

App stores:

    mu      sync.Mutex
    windows []*window.Window
    running bool

mu protects the application registry and running flag during operations that
mutate or snapshot them. windows contains the Window values registered through
App.Window. running controls whether the native event-pump loop continues.

The application keeps pointers to windows because each Window owns mutable UI,
layout, rendering, and native-handle state. App manages membership and lifecycle
but does not duplicate that per-window state.

Creating an App
---------------

New returns an App with an empty window slice and initial capacity for four
windows:

    app := app.New()

The capacity is an allocation hint, not a limit. Registering more than four
windows grows the slice normally.

The running flag starts false. It becomes true when Run begins and becomes false
when Quit is called or when the current lifecycle naturally stops.

Registering Windows
-------------------

Window creates a new window.Window using the supplied WindowOption functions,
then appends it to the application's registry under the mutex.

Native window creation is deliberately deferred until Run. This allows callers
to configure titles, sizes, components, themes, callbacks, and other options
before platform resources are requested.

A typical setup is:

    application := app.New()
    mainWindow := application.Window(
        window.WithTitle("Nova"),
        window.WithSize(800, 600),
    )

The exact available options belong to the window package. App only forwards
them to window.NewWindow and registers the result.

Window Registry
---------------

Windows returns the currently registered window slice while holding the mutex.
The current implementation returns the internal slice rather than a defensive
copy. Callers should treat the returned slice as read-only and should not modify
its length or elements.

Because the slice is internal, retaining it across later calls to Window can
expose normal Go slice aliasing behavior. Code that needs a stable snapshot
should copy the returned slice while coordinating with the application's
lifecycle.

Run Lifecycle
-------------

Run performs these broad stages:

1. Mark the application as running.
2. Copy the registered window slice into a stable local snapshot.
3. Create a native platform window for each configured Window.
4. Attach each successfully created native window.
5. Render an initial frame for every configured Window.
6. Enter the native event and redraw loop when at least one native window exists.
7. Stop when Quit is requested, every native window closes, or polling reports
   that no native window remains open.

The window snapshot means the current Run invocation processes the windows that
were registered before startup. A window registered later is not added to the
local loop snapshot and would require another lifecycle decision before it can
participate in native polling.

Native Window Creation
----------------------

For each registered Window, Run obtains its title and logical size, converts the
size to integers, and calls platform.CreatePlatformWindow.

When creation succeeds and returns a non-nil native window:

- Window.AttachNative stores the native handle.
- hasNative becomes true.
- The window participates in event polling and redraw checks.

If platform creation returns an error or nil handle, the current implementation
does not return that error immediately. It continues initializing other windows
and still calls RenderFrame on the affected Window. This behavior allows
headless or partially unavailable environments to complete the setup path, but
it also means callers do not receive detailed native-creation failures from Run.

Initial Rendering
-----------------

Run calls RenderFrame once for every registered Window after attempting native
creation. This gives a newly created native window content before the event loop
begins.

The initial render also occurs when native creation fails. In that case it can
still prepare the Window's command and pixel state for headless operation or
later use, depending on the Window implementation.

Native Event Loop
-----------------

The event loop runs only if at least one native window was successfully created.
Each iteration checks the running flag, then visits every Window in the startup
snapshot.

For each Window with a native handle:

1. PollEvents drains pending native input and window events.
2. A true result marks that at least one native window remains open.
3. NeedsRedraw determines whether a new frame is required.
4. RenderFrame runs only for dirty windows.

This avoids rendering every window on every iteration when no state has changed.
It also lets multiple windows share one application loop while keeping redraw
work localized.

The loop sleeps for 8 milliseconds after an iteration that still has an open
window. This prevents a tight busy loop while maintaining a reasonably frequent
polling cadence. The actual responsiveness also depends on the native backend,
rendering cost, and callback work.

Window Closure
-------------

A native window's PollEvents method returns false after its close request is
processed. App does not itself destroy the native handle in the loop; the Window
or native backend owns that cleanup according to its implementation.

If every native window returns false or no native window remains attached,
anyOpen stays false and Run breaks out of the loop. This provides natural
termination when the user closes the last application window.

Quit
----

Quit acquires the application mutex and sets running to false. It is intended as
a request to stop the active Run loop.

When called from another goroutine, the loop observes the flag between event
polling iterations. The current iteration completes its in-progress callback or
render operation before Run returns.

Quit does not directly close native windows, clear the registry, or destroy
window state. It controls application-loop termination; resource cleanup remains
with the Window and platform layers.

Concurrency
-----------

App protects its own windows slice and running flag with mu. Window methods have
their own synchronization rules and should not be assumed safe merely because
App uses a mutex.

Run copies the window slice while holding the mutex, then releases it before
performing platform creation and rendering. This avoids holding the application
lock across potentially expensive native or user-code operations.

The local windows snapshot is stable for the current Run call, but the Window
objects themselves remain shared pointers. If another goroutine mutates a
Window while Run renders or polls it, safety depends on Window's own locking and
lifecycle guarantees.

Headless and Native Modes
-------------------------

The lifecycle distinguishes whether any native window was created:

- If hasNative is false, Run performs initialization and initial rendering, then
  returns without entering an OS event loop.
- If hasNative is true, Run continuously polls and redraws until termination.

This makes the application coordinator usable in environments without a native
display, provided the downstream Window and renderer layers support that mode.
The exact build-time platform selection belongs to the platform package.

Error Handling
--------------

Run currently returns error but does not produce an error from its own control
flow. Native creation errors are ignored after the failed window attempt, and
the loop itself returns nil.

This is a simple lifecycle contract, but applications that need to distinguish
missing displays, failed native windows, or rendering failures may need a future
error aggregation policy. Possible policies include returning the first native
error, collecting all per-window errors, or exposing a callback for startup
failures.

Window Ownership Boundaries
---------------------------

App owns:

- The registry of configured Window pointers.
- The application running flag.
- The ordering in which windows are initialized and polled.
- The decision to continue or stop the shared lifecycle loop.

Window owns:

- Window configuration after construction.
- UI component and layout state.
- Render command and framebuffer preparation.
- The attached native-window reference and per-window callbacks.

Platform owns:

- Native display and operating-system window creation.
- Native event polling and close signaling.
- Backend-specific resource cleanup.

Keeping these boundaries clear prevents App from becoming coupled to rendering
or operating-system details.

Typical Lifecycle Example
-------------------------

    application := app.New()
    application.Window(window.WithTitle("Main"))
    application.Window(window.WithTitle("Inspector"))

    if err := application.Run(); err != nil {
        log.Fatal(err)
    }

Run initializes both windows, performs their first renders, then services both
from one event loop. A callback or another goroutine can call application.Quit
to request termination.

Testing Guidance
----------------

Useful application-level tests include:

- New creates an empty registry and a stopped application.
- Window registers and returns the configured Window.
- Windows reports registered windows in insertion order.
- Run snapshots the registered windows before startup work.
- Initial RenderFrame is called for every configured window.
- Native creation success attaches a handle and enables polling.
- Native creation failure does not prevent other windows from initializing.
- NeedsRedraw controls subsequent frame rendering.
- A false PollEvents result allows the loop to stop when no windows remain.
- Quit changes the running state and causes Run to terminate.
- Concurrent Window and Quit operations do not corrupt App state.

Because Run interacts with platform and Window behavior, tests may use a fake
platform or focused lower-level tests. The current code calls the platform
package directly, so introducing a test seam would require an explicit design
change rather than hidden global substitution.

Maintenance Checklist
---------------------

When changing app.go:

1. Keep window registration protected by mu.
2. Snapshot windows before long-running startup work.
3. Preserve initial rendering before event polling.
4. Poll only windows with attached native handles.
5. Render only windows that report NeedsRedraw when inside the loop.
6. Keep Quit limited to application-loop state unless cleanup is intentional.
7. Document native creation error policy.
8. Avoid holding the App mutex across callbacks, rendering, or platform calls.
9. Define behavior for windows added after Run starts.
10. Keep App focused on lifecycle coordination rather than rendering details.

Summary
-------

App is Nova's top-level lifecycle coordinator. It registers Window objects,
creates native counterparts at startup, renders initial frames, polls events,
redraws dirty windows, and stops when requested or when all native windows close.

Its synchronization protects the registry and lifecycle flag, while the stable
Run snapshot keeps one invocation predictable. Native creation and rendering
errors are currently tolerated, and Quit requests loop termination without
performing direct resource cleanup.
