Nova Color Package Explanation
==============================

Purpose
-------

core/color/color.go defines Nova's color value and the conversion, adjustment,
and accessibility helpers used throughout rendering and theming.

The package represents colors with normalized float64 channels, then converts to
8-bit formats only at output boundaries. This keeps color operations precise
while allowing renderers to write standard image.RGBA or image/color values.

The main responsibilities are:

- Store RGBA colors in normalized form.
- Construct colors from byte, float, hexadecimal, and HSL input.
- Convert colors to Go's NRGBA and a packed uint32 representation.
- Adjust alpha, brightness, and interpolation.
- Calculate WCAG relative luminance and contrast.
- Provide common palette constants.

Color Representation
--------------------

Color contains four float64 channels:

    type Color struct {
        R float64
        G float64
        B float64
        A float64
    }

R, G, and B represent red, green, and blue. A represents alpha, or opacity.
The intended range for every channel is [0, 1]:

- 0 means none of that channel or complete transparency for alpha.
- 1 means full channel intensity or complete opacity for alpha.

Normalized values make blending formulas straightforward and avoid repeated
integer conversion during intermediate color operations. The final conversion
to bytes happens in NRGBA or in renderer-specific pixel code.

Color does not premultiply RGB by alpha. RGB and A remain independent channels.
Renderers that need premultiplied alpha must perform that conversion explicitly
at the compositing boundary.

RGBA Constructor
----------------

RGBA creates a Color from four uint8 values in [0, 255]. Each channel is divided
by 255:

    normalized = byte / 255.0

For example:

    RGBA(255, 0, 128, 255)

represents fully opaque red 1.0, green 0.0, blue approximately 0.502, and alpha
1.0.

Because the input type is uint8, values are already limited to the valid byte
range. RGBA is appropriate when values come from image files, platform pixels,
or other 8-bit APIs.

RGB Constructor
---------------

RGB creates an opaque color from red, green, and blue bytes. It delegates to
RGBA with alpha 255.

    RGB(59, 130, 246)

is equivalent to:

    RGBA(59, 130, 246, 255)

Use RGB for ordinary solid colors when no transparency is needed.

FloatRGBA Constructor
---------------------

FloatRGBA creates a color from float64 channels and clamps each value to [0, 1]
with clamp01. This is useful for calculations, gradients, procedural colors,
and values already expressed in normalized space.

For example:

    FloatRGBA(1.2, 0.5, -0.1, 0.75)

becomes approximately:

    R = 1.0
    G = 0.5
    B = 0.0
    A = 0.75

Clamping prevents invalid channel values from escaping through this constructor.
Methods that preserve or combine existing Color values may rely on those values
already being normalized.

Hex Parsing
-----------

Hex parses common CSS-style hexadecimal forms. A leading # is optional. The
supported lengths are:

- 3 digits: RGB, for example #F00.
- 4 digits: RGBA, for example #F00F.
- 6 digits: RRGGBB, for example #FF0000.
- 8 digits: RRGGBBAA, for example #FF000088.

Short forms duplicate each nibble. For #3BF:

    3 -> 33
    B -> BB
    F -> FF

Six- and eight-digit forms use two hexadecimal digits per channel. Eight-digit
input places alpha last, matching RRGGBBAA rather than the ARGB ordering used by
some other APIs.

If the input has an unsupported length, the initial defaults remain in use:
red, green, and blue are zero, while alpha is 255. Parse errors are ignored by
the current implementation, so invalid digits leave the affected parsed value
at the parse function's zero result. Callers that require strict validation
should validate the string before calling Hex or a future error-returning parser
should be introduced.

Hex always returns through RGBA, so the result uses normalized float channels.

HSL and HSLA
------------

HSL creates an opaque color from hue, saturation, and lightness. It delegates to
HSLA with alpha 1.

HSLA accepts:

- h: hue in degrees, conceptually [0, 360).
- s: saturation in [0, 1].
- l: lightness in [0, 1].
- a: alpha in [0, 1].

Hue wraps with modulo 360. Negative hue values are moved into the positive
range. Saturation, lightness, and alpha are clamped.

The conversion uses the standard HSL intermediate values:

    C = (1 - |2L - 1|)S
    X = C(1 - |(H/60 mod 2) - 1|)
    m = L - C/2

Depending on the hue sector, C, X, and zero are assigned to the temporary RGB
channels. The match value m is then added to each channel.

Hue sectors are:

- [0, 60): red to yellow.
- [60, 120): yellow to green.
- [120, 180): green to cyan.
- [180, 240): cyan to blue.
- [240, 300): blue to magenta.
- [300, 360): magenta to red.

When saturation is zero, all RGB channels become the same value and the result
is gray at the requested lightness.

Byte Conversion with NRGBA
--------------------------

NRGBA converts normalized channels to Go's image/color.NRGBA type. Each channel
is multiplied by 255 and rounded:

    byteChannel = round(normalizedChannel * 255)

NRGBA is non-premultiplied. RGB remains independent of alpha, which matches the
Color representation and is suitable for APIs expecting image/color.Color.

The method name is NRGBA, matching Go's standard type. It should not be confused
with a premultiplied RGBA representation.

Packed RGBAUint32
-----------------

RGBAUint32 packs rounded channels into a uint32 with the layout:

    0xRRGGBBAA

The packing operation is:

    (R << 24) | (G << 16) | (B << 8) | A

This is a numeric layout, not necessarily the byte order in memory on every
machine. Code that writes the value directly to a byte buffer should account for
endianness and the destination format.

The channels are not explicitly clamped in RGBAUint32. Normal Color values are
expected to be normalized; callers holding manually constructed out-of-range
Color values should normalize them before packing.

Alpha Operations
----------------

WithAlpha returns a copy with the supplied alpha clamped to [0, 1]. RGB is
unchanged. It is useful when an effect needs a specific opacity:

    faded := color.Blue.WithAlpha(0.5)

MultiplyAlpha returns a copy whose alpha is multiplied by factor and clamped.
RGB remains unchanged:

    faded := color.Blue.MultiplyAlpha(0.5)

These methods do not premultiply or dim RGB. A renderer applies the alpha during
compositing. Keeping RGB unchanged also allows a cached color to be reused for
multiple opacity levels.

Lighten
-------

Lighten moves every RGB channel toward white by amount:

    channel' = channel + (1 - channel) * amount

Alpha is preserved. Amount 0 leaves the channel unchanged, while amount 1 moves
it to white. The resulting channel is clamped through clamp01.

Lighten operates in the package's stored RGB space. It is not a perceptual HSL
lightness adjustment and does not perform a linear-light conversion first.

Darken
------

Darken scales every RGB channel toward black:

    channel' = channel * (1 - amount)

Alpha is preserved. Amount 0 leaves the color unchanged, while amount 1 makes
all RGB channels black. The resulting channels are clamped through clamp01.

Like Lighten, Darken operates directly on the stored RGB channels rather than a
perceptual color space.

Interpolation with Lerp
-----------------------

Lerp linearly interpolates this Color toward another Color by factor t. All four
channels, including alpha, are interpolated:

    result = start + (end - start) * t

The factor t is clamped to [0, 1]. Therefore:

- t = 0 returns the starting color.
- t = 1 returns the other color.
- Intermediate values create a channel-by-channel blend.

Lerp is useful for animations, gradients, hover transitions, and theme changes.
It is a direct channel interpolation, not gamma-correct or perceptually uniform
interpolation.

Luminance
---------

Luminance returns relative sRGB luminance according to WCAG 2.1. Alpha is
ignored, so the value describes the RGB color itself rather than a color
composited over a background.

Each sRGB channel is first converted into linear-light space by srgbToLinear.
The linear channels are weighted according to human visual sensitivity:

    L = 0.2126R + 0.7152G + 0.0722B

Green receives the largest coefficient because the eye is most sensitive to its
contribution in this model. Blue receives the smallest.

The result is generally in [0, 1] for normalized channels. Accurate WCAG
contrast calculations require this linear conversion; directly weighting the
stored sRGB values would produce incorrect results.

sRGB Transfer Function
----------------------

srgbToLinear uses the standard piecewise sRGB transfer function:

    v / 12.92                         if v <= 0.04045
    ((v + 0.055) / 1.055) ^ 2.4       otherwise

The lower branch handles the near-black linear segment. The higher branch
converts encoded sRGB intensity into linear-light intensity.

ContrastRatio
-------------

ContrastRatio calculates relative contrast between two colors:

    (lighter + 0.05) / (darker + 0.05)

where lighter is the larger luminance and darker is the smaller. The theoretical
range is 1 for identical luminance through 21 for black versus white.

Alpha is ignored. If a foreground color is translucent, callers should first
composite it over the intended background and calculate contrast using the
resulting visible color.

WCAG commonly recommends a ratio of at least 4.5:1 for normal body text and
3:1 for large text, though the appropriate threshold depends on the interface
and accessibility requirements.

HexString and String
--------------------

HexString converts the Color to uppercase hexadecimal text. Opaque colors use:

    #RRGGBB

Colors whose alpha is below approximately 1 use:

    #RRGGBBAA

Channels are multiplied by 255 and rounded before formatting. The alpha
threshold is 0.999 rather than an exact comparison with 1, so values extremely
close to opaque use the compact six-digit form.

String delegates to HexString, allowing Color to satisfy fmt.Stringer and to
appear in logs, formatting, and debugging output as a readable hex value.

Clamping
--------

clamp01 restricts a value to the closed interval [0, 1]:

- Values below zero become zero.
- Values above one become one.
- Values inside the interval remain unchanged.

It is used by FloatRGBA, HSLA, alpha operations, and brightness operations. It
is not automatically applied to every field access, so callers should prefer
constructors and methods over manually creating invalid Color values.

Common Palette
--------------

The package exports common colors for UI and example code:

- Transparent.
- Black and White.
- Red, Green, Blue, Yellow, Cyan, and Magenta.
- Gray50 through Gray950.

The vivid colors use a modern UI-oriented palette rather than the maximum
primary byte values. Gray constants progress from very light Gray50 to very
dark Gray950 and are created with Hex.

These are package-level Color values. Color contains only scalar fields, so
reading and copying them is inexpensive. Callers should treat the shared values
as constants and create modified copies with methods such as WithAlpha,
Lighten, or Darken.

Memory and Concurrency
----------------------

Color values are plain value types with no internal mutable state. Copying a
Color copies its four channels. The package-level palette values can be read
concurrently.

The helper functions also do not maintain mutable caches or global rendering
state. They are safe to call concurrently as long as callers do not concurrently
mutate a shared Color variable themselves.

Validation and Invalid Input
----------------------------

The current API favors convenient value-returning functions over error returns:

- RGBA accepts only valid uint8 channels by type.
- FloatRGBA and HSLA clamp normalized values.
- Hex ignores parse errors and returns a default/fallback-like color.
- Color methods assume manually constructed channels are sensible.
- ContrastRatio and Luminance do not inspect alpha.

Applications needing strict user-input validation should validate hexadecimal
strings and numeric ranges before constructing colors, or add an error-returning
API alongside the convenient helpers.

Testing Guidance
----------------

Useful tests for this package include:

- Byte constructors map 0 and 255 to 0 and 1.
- FloatRGBA clamps every channel independently.
- RGB always returns alpha 1.
- Hex supports all four documented lengths and optional #.
- Hex short digits duplicate correctly.
- HSL hue wraps for values below zero and above 360.
- HSLA clamps saturation, lightness, and alpha.
- NRGBA rounds expected byte values.
- RGBAUint32 uses RRGGBBAA numeric packing.
- WithAlpha replaces only alpha.
- MultiplyAlpha scales and clamps alpha.
- Lighten and Darken preserve alpha.
- Lerp clamps its factor and interpolates alpha.
- Luminance and contrast match WCAG reference values.
- HexString omits alpha for opaque colors and includes it for translucent ones.
- Shared palette values remain stable.

Tests should also make the current invalid-hex behavior explicit if that behavior
is part of the public compatibility contract.

Maintenance Checklist
---------------------

When changing color.go:

1. Keep normalized channel assumptions clear.
2. Clamp user-facing float constructors and factors consistently.
3. Preserve the documented hexadecimal channel order.
4. Keep byte conversion rounding behavior stable unless intentionally changed.
5. Distinguish non-premultiplied Color/NRGBA from renderer premultiplication.
6. Preserve alpha semantics in color adjustment methods.
7. Use linear-light conversion for WCAG luminance.
8. Document whether new operations are RGB, HSL, or linear-light based.
9. Add tests for edge values, especially zero, one, and out-of-range input.
10. Treat shared palette values as read-only values.

Summary
-------

Nova's Color type stores RGBA channels as normalized float64 values for precise
intermediate work. Constructors cover byte, float, hexadecimal, and HSL input;
methods cover output conversion, alpha adjustment, brightness, interpolation,
and accessibility calculations.

The package intentionally keeps color values independent from rendering
backends. It provides the mathematical and representation layer, while
renderers decide how colors are blended into pixels and how alpha interacts with
background content.
