CommandBuffer Explanation
==========================

Purpose
-------

render/buffer.go defines CommandBuffer, Nova's lightweight command recording
container for rendering work. Instead of drawing immediately, code can record a
sequence of render.Command values and let a later stage inspect or execute
those commands.

This is useful when a frame, layer, component, or scene needs to describe its
visual output before the renderer processes it. The buffer preserves command
order, so commands are normally consumed in the same order in which they were
added.

The implementation is intentionally small. It does not interpret, sort,
execute, serialize, or merge commands. Its responsibility is to own an ordered
collection and provide the basic operations needed to build and reuse it.

File Structure
--------------

The file contains:

- The render package declaration.
- The sync import.
- The CommandBuffer type.
- A constructor for creating an empty buffer.
- Push for recording one command.
- Commands for reading the recorded commands.
- Len for checking the number of commands.
- Clear for reusing the buffer.

CommandBuffer Data Model
------------------------

CommandBuffer contains two fields:

    mu       sync.Mutex
    commands []Command

The commands slice stores the actual ordered drawing commands. A slice is a Go
header containing a pointer to an underlying array, a length, and a capacity.
The length is the number of active commands. The capacity is the number of
commands that can fit before Go must allocate a larger backing array.

The mu field is a mutex reserved for synchronization. The current methods do
not lock or unlock it, so CommandBuffer is not currently safe for concurrent
reads and writes. The mutex should either be used consistently if concurrent
access becomes part of the design, or removed if command buffers are intended
to remain single-owner values.

A command buffer should normally be built and consumed by one rendering flow or
protected by an external synchronization policy. Concurrent calls to Push,
Commands, Len, or Clear can race and must be avoided with the current code.

Creating a Buffer
-----------------

NewCommandBuffer creates and returns an empty CommandBuffer:

    commands: make([]Command, 0, 128)

The initial length is zero, meaning no commands have been recorded. The initial
capacity is 128, which gives the first group of Push calls room to append
without immediately allocating another backing array.

The capacity is an allocation hint, not a maximum. If more than 128 commands
are appended, Go automatically grows the slice according to its normal slice
growth rules. If a typical frame contains substantially fewer or more commands,
the initial capacity can be adjusted based on profiling data.

Recording Commands with Push
----------------------------

Push appends one Command to the end of the buffer:

    cb.commands = append(cb.commands, cmd)

Appending preserves insertion order. If commands A, B, and C are pushed in
that order, Commands returns them as A, B, and C.

The command value is copied into the slice. This is normal Go value semantics.
If Command contains pointers, slices, maps, or other reference-like fields,
those referenced objects are not deeply copied. The behavior of such nested
data remains governed by the Command type itself.

Push does not validate the command, reject duplicates, execute rendering, or
notify another subsystem. Validation and execution belong to the code that
understands the meaning of each Command.

Reading Commands
----------------

Commands returns the buffer's recorded command slice:

    return cb.commands

The returned value is a slice backed by the same underlying array as the
CommandBuffer. It is not a defensive copy. This has two important consequences:

1. Reading the returned slice is efficient because it avoids copying every
   command.
2. The caller can mutate the buffer's command storage through the returned
   slice, including changing existing elements or reslicing within capacity.

Callers should therefore treat the returned slice as a view owned by the
CommandBuffer unless the API is intentionally being used for direct mutation.
A future implementation could return a copy when isolation is required, but
that would add allocation and copy cost.

The returned slice also becomes logically stale after Clear or after an append
causes the buffer to grow. A caller retaining it should not assume it tracks
future buffer changes.

Checking Length with Len
------------------------

Len returns len(cb.commands), the number of active commands currently recorded.
It is the authoritative count used by the buffer itself.

Len is useful for:

- Checking whether there is rendering work before processing.
- Preallocating output or temporary storage.
- Iterating by index.
- Reporting frame or layer command counts for diagnostics.
- Measuring rendering workload during profiling.

Len reports the current slice length, not capacity. Reserved but unused backing
storage is not counted as a command.

Reusing a Buffer with Clear
---------------------------

Clear resets the active command range with:

    cb.commands = cb.commands[:0]

This changes the length to zero while retaining the existing backing array and
its capacity. The next Push can reuse that storage instead of forcing a fresh
allocation.

Clear is intended for frame-to-frame or layer-to-layer reuse. A common pattern
is:

    buffer.Clear()
    buffer.Push(backgroundCommand)
    buffer.Push(contentCommand)
    process(buffer.Commands())

Clear does not shrink capacity and does not release the backing array to the
runtime. This is beneficial when successive frames have similar command counts.
It may retain memory longer than needed if a very large temporary frame causes
the slice to grow and later frames are much smaller.

Clear also does not explicitly zero the elements that were previously active.
The old values remain in the backing array beyond the new length until future
appends overwrite them or the backing array is released. Those values are not
part of the buffer's logical contents because the slice length is zero.

Typical Rendering Flow
----------------------

A normal command-buffer lifecycle looks like this:

    NewCommandBuffer
            |
            v
        Push commands
            |
            v
      Inspect with Len or Commands
            |
            v
       Execute or submit commands
            |
            v
           Clear
            |
            +----> reuse for the next frame

The buffer is a recording step, not the complete rendering pipeline. Another
component must decide how each Command affects a canvas, framebuffer, renderer,
or platform window.

Ordering Semantics
------------------

CommandBuffer does not reorder commands. The slice sequence is the only order
maintained by this type.

For a painter-style renderer, ordering can affect the final image. For example,
a later fill may cover an earlier shape, and a later text command may appear on
top of earlier geometry. Code that consumes the buffer should normally iterate
from index 0 through Len()-1 unless the renderer explicitly defines a different
policy.

The buffer also does not group commands by layer, clip region, material, or
z-index. If batching or sorting is added later, it should be implemented by a
renderer or a separate optimization stage with clearly documented ordering
rules.

Memory and Performance
----------------------

The design favors low overhead in a render loop:

- The slice is allocated with useful initial capacity.
- Push uses Go's built-in append operation.
- Commands returns a view without copying.
- Clear reuses the existing backing array.

This makes the common sequence of record, consume, and clear inexpensive. The
tradeoff is that callers must understand slice aliasing and retained capacity.

For performance investigations, monitor both Len and capacity. A high command
count may indicate complex content, while a large capacity with a small Len may
indicate that a previous frame caused significant growth. Capacity is not
currently exposed by CommandBuffer, so inspecting it would require changing the
API or using profiling/debugging code.

Nil and Zero-Value Behavior
---------------------------

The zero value of CommandBuffer has a nil commands slice. It can still be used
with Push because append works with a nil slice. Len returns zero, and Clear
reslices the nil slice to length zero successfully.

NewCommandBuffer is still the preferred constructor because it supplies the
initial capacity of 128 commands.

A nil *CommandBuffer pointer is different from a zero-value CommandBuffer.
Calling methods through a nil pointer will panic because the methods dereference
cb. Callers should ensure the pointer itself is non-nil.

Concurrency and Mutex Notes
---------------------------

Although CommandBuffer includes sync.Mutex, no current method uses cb.mu. The
presence of a mutex does not automatically make field access synchronized.

If concurrent access is required, every operation that reads or changes the
slice must follow one consistent locking policy. That includes Commands,
because returning the slice while another goroutine modifies it would still
allow a race after the method returns. A simple future policy could be:

- Lock around Push, Len, and Clear.
- Lock while copying commands for a snapshot.
- Avoid returning the internal slice directly, or document that callers must
  hold an agreed lock while using it.

Another valid design is ownership transfer: one goroutine records commands,
then hands the completed buffer to a renderer, and no goroutine accesses it
during the handoff. That approach can avoid lock overhead but requires clear
lifecycle discipline.

Error Handling
--------------

CommandBuffer does not return errors. Its operations are in-memory slice
operations and do not perform I/O or invoke the renderer. Allocation failures
are handled by the Go runtime rather than returned from Push or NewCommandBuffer.

Errors related to invalid drawing parameters, unsupported command kinds, or
native rendering failures belong to the layer that interprets or submits the
commands.

Maintenance Guidelines
----------------------

When changing buffer.go, preserve these expectations unless the public API is
intentionally being redesigned:

1. Push appends and preserves command order.
2. Commands exposes the current active command sequence.
3. Len reports the active sequence length.
4. Clear removes commands from the logical sequence.
5. Clear retains capacity for efficient reuse.
6. No operation should unexpectedly execute a drawing command.
7. Any concurrency guarantee must be implemented consistently across all
   methods, not inferred from the presence of sync.Mutex.

Questions to Consider Before Extending
---------------------------------------

Before adding features, decide whether the buffer is intended to be:

- A single-threaded temporary frame recorder.
- A synchronized collection shared by producer and renderer goroutines.
- An immutable snapshot passed between pipeline stages.
- A reusable pool-backed object for high-frequency rendering.

Those choices affect whether Commands should return the internal slice, a copy,
or an iterator; whether mu should be used; and whether Clear should retain or
release memory.

Summary
-------

CommandBuffer is an ordered, reusable slice of render commands. New commands
are appended with Push, the active commands can be viewed with Commands, the
active count is available through Len, and Clear resets the logical contents
without normally reallocating storage.

Its main strengths are simplicity, predictable ordering, and low allocation
pressure in repeated render loops. Its main API caveat is that Commands returns
the internal slice, and its main implementation caveat is that the declared
mutex is currently unused. Both details should remain visible to anyone using
or extending this type.
