Nova UI Integration Test Explanation
====================================

Purpose
-------

ui/ui_test.go contains an integration test for Nova's public component-tree
pipeline. It verifies that a declarative tree can be built, mounted, laid out,
painted into render commands, hit-tested, and connected to a button callback.

The test is intentionally broader than a unit test for one helper. It checks the
hand-off between these layers:

    builder components
          |
          v
       Node.Mount
          |
          v
       Node.Layout
          |
          v
       Node.Paint
          |
          v
    CommandBuffer
          |
          v
       Node.HitTest
          |
          v
      click callback

It does not open a native operating-system window or verify rasterized pixels.
Those concerns belong to platform and renderer tests.

External Package Testing
------------------------

The test uses package ui_test instead of package ui. This makes it exercise the
exported API from the perspective of an external consumer. It cannot rely on
unexported Node or component fields except through exported fields and methods
that are intentionally part of the public model.

Callback Setup
--------------

The test starts with:

    clicked := false

The button callback sets clicked to true. The final assertion verifies that the
hit-test target's click handler was actually reached and executed.

This is more useful than checking only that a non-nil callback exists. A callback
could be present on the wrong node; invoking it confirms that the tested target
is connected to the configured behavior.

Building the Component Tree
---------------------------

The tree contains a vertical Column with two children:

1. A Text component containing "Welcome to Nova".
2. A horizontal Row containing one Button labeled "Click Me".

The Row uses an 8-unit gap, and the outer Column uses a 12-unit gap. These gaps
make the test exercise nested layout and parent-relative positioning.

The button is configured with OnClick and stores a callback that updates clicked.
The test does not call the callback at construction time; it waits until after
hit testing to prove the event target path.

Mounting
--------

The test creates a retained root node:

    node := ui.NewNode(tree)

Then it mounts the tree with:

    node.Mount(ui.BuildContext{
        Theme: theme.Dark(),
        Scale: 1.0,
    })

Mount triggers component reconciliation and creates the retained child nodes.
The dark theme and unit scale provide explicit context rather than relying on
implicit zero values.

Mounting is important because later layout, paint, and hit testing operate on
Nodes, not only on the original declarative Component value.

Layout Assertion
----------------

The root is laid out with tight 400 by 300 constraints:

    layout.Tight(geom.Sz(400, 300))

The test expects the returned size to be exactly 400 by 300. This confirms that
the root honors the supplied tight constraints and that the component tree can
produce a valid measured result.

The assertion checks both dimensions because a component could accidentally
honor only one axis while still returning a plausible-looking size.

The test does not inspect every child bound during this phase. The later button
center calculation relies on those bounds and provides an indirect verification
that nested layout produced usable positions.

Painting Assertion
------------------

The test creates a CommandBuffer and Canvas, then calls:

    node.Paint(canvas)

Canvas records render commands rather than drawing directly to a native window.
The test checks that the buffer length is nonzero.

This assertion verifies that the mounted tree produced visual work. It does not
assert an exact command count because the test is intended to tolerate reasonable
changes in component paint implementation, such as adding a background or
additional decoration.

It also does not verify final pixels. Command construction and pixel
rasterization are separate responsibilities and should have separate focused
tests.

Finding the Button Node
-----------------------

The test accesses the expected retained path:

    rowNode := node.Children[1]
    btnNode := rowNode.Children[0]

The root Column's second child is the Row, and the Row's first child is the
Button. This is a deliberate assertion about the simple builder tree shape.

If component structure changes, this path should be updated together with the
test's expected tree description. A more general test could search by key or
component identity, but direct indexing keeps this integration scenario concise.

Absolute Button Center
----------------------

The button's center is calculated in the root coordinate space by adding the
origins of each nested node:

    x = root.X + row.X + button.X + button.Width / 2
    y = root.Y + row.Y + button.Y + button.Height / 2

The test uses geom.Pt to build that point.

Bounds are parent-relative. The button position is relative to the row, the row
position is relative to the column, and the column position is relative to the
root's parent coordinate space. Adding those origins reconstructs a point that
can be passed to the root's HitTest method.

The center is chosen rather than an edge point so the test avoids ambiguous
boundary behavior and is unlikely to land outside the button because of a
one-pixel rounding difference.

Hit Testing
-----------

The test calls:

    hit := node.HitTest(btnCenter)

Node.HitTest traverses children from topmost paint order toward the front and
returns the deepest interactive node containing the point. Since the point lies
inside the button, the expected result is a non-nil button node.

The first assertion rejects a missing target. A successful hit proves that the
retained bounds, parent-relative layout, interactive handler detection, and
coordinate traversal agree well enough to locate the button.

Callback Execution
------------------

After a hit is found, the test checks whether hit.OnClick is non-nil and invokes
it. The final assertion expects clicked to be true.

This test invokes the callback directly after obtaining the hit target rather
than simulating a complete platform pointer event. That keeps the scope focused
on tree hit testing and target selection. Event dispatch, pointer press mapping,
and propagation should be covered in separate tests.

What the Test Covers
--------------------

The test verifies:

- Public builder composition.
- Nested Column and Row structure.
- Button callback configuration.
- Node creation and mounting.
- BuildContext theme and scale setup.
- Tight root layout constraints.
- Non-empty render command recording.
- Parent-relative bounds used to calculate absolute coordinates.
- Deep interactive-node hit testing.
- Button callback reachability.

What the Test Does Not Cover
----------------------------

The test does not verify:

- Exact text measurement or glyph output.
- Exact flex gap dimensions.
- Every child bound independently.
- Pointer event propagation or StopPropagation.
- Hover enter and leave transitions.
- Keyboard, scroll, or focus events.
- Overlay hit testing.
- Native X11 or other platform event translation.
- Rasterizer pixel correctness.
- Theme color contrast.
- Concurrent tree access.
- Dynamic reconciliation after a state update.
- Unmount cleanup behavior.

Keeping these concerns separate makes failures easier to localize. A failure in
this test indicates a problem crossing the public component, node, layout, paint,
or hit-test boundaries; it does not by itself identify a renderer or platform
bug.

Failure Diagnostics
-------------------

The layout failure includes the actual Size using its String method. The paint
failure reports only that no commands were recorded because the expected
condition is simple. The hit-test and callback failures identify the missing
stage of interaction.

The test uses t.Fatal and t.Fatalf because later operations depend on earlier
ones. For example, continuing after a nil hit would make callback assertions
misleading.

Recommended Extensions
----------------------

Focused follow-up tests could add:

- A command count and payload assertion for Text and Button painting.
- Child-bound assertions for Column, Row, and gap placement.
- A Restore-coordinate test after nested layout painting.
- Overlapping children to verify reverse-order hit selection.
- A pointer event dispatch test that checks propagation.
- A reactive text update followed by relayout and repaint.
- An unmount test that verifies cleanup functions execute.
- A theme-switch test that verifies redraw invalidation.
- A scale test using a non-unit scale factor.

Each extension should state whether it protects component construction, retained
node state, layout geometry, command recording, or event routing.

Maintenance Guidelines
----------------------

When changing this test:

1. Keep the component tree description near the setup code.
2. Preserve explicit BuildContext values.
3. Keep the layout constraints intentional and documented.
4. Calculate hit points from actual parent-relative bounds.
5. Prefer interior points over boundaries for stable hit assertions.
6. Keep native and rasterizer behavior in their own test packages.
7. Update the expected child path when builder structure changes.
8. Add exact assertions only when they protect a meaningful contract.
9. Keep callback assertions tied to the target selected by hit testing.
10. Run the focused UI tests after modifying the component lifecycle.

Summary
-------

TestUIComponentTreeAndHitTest is a compact end-to-end check for Nova's public UI
pipeline. It builds a nested component tree, mounts it into retained Nodes, lays
it out under tight constraints, records paint commands, reconstructs the
button's absolute center from nested bounds, finds the interactive target, and
verifies the click callback.

Its strength is testing the boundaries between builders, Node lifecycle, layout,
Canvas recording, and hit testing without depending on a native display or
specific rasterizer pixels. More specialized tests should cover the detailed
behavior that this integration test intentionally leaves out.
