Nova Benchmarks Explanation
===========================

Purpose
-------

benchmarks/benchmarks_test.go contains Go benchmarks for several important Nova
workloads. Each Benchmark function follows Go's testing.Benchmark convention:
the framework chooses b.N and repeats the timed body to estimate throughput and
allocation behavior.

The file measures five areas:

- Application startup and component mounting.
- Flex layout with 1,000 children.
- Reactive state mutation and derived-value evaluation.
- Virtualized visible-range calculation across 100,000 rows.
- Repeated render-command recording for a 500-command batch.

These benchmarks are workload probes, not correctness tests. Their purpose is
to make performance changes visible and provide repeatable scenarios for
profiling.

Go Benchmark Model
------------------

A benchmark receives *testing.B. The testing package controls b.N and may run
the benchmark body multiple times during calibration. The body should perform
the operation being measured once per iteration:

    for i := 0; i < b.N; i++ {
        operation()
    }

The framework reports time per operation and can report allocations when run
with appropriate Go test flags.

b.ResetTimer
------------

The benchmarks call b.ResetTimer after preparing reusable setup data. This tells
the testing framework to exclude that preparation from the measured interval.

Resetting the timer is appropriate when setup is not the workload of interest.
It is not used in BenchmarkAppStartupAndMount because constructing the App,
window, and component tree is specifically the startup behavior that benchmark
measures.

BenchmarkAppStartupAndMount
---------------------------

This benchmark measures one application startup cycle per iteration:

1. Create a new Nova App.
2. Create and register a 1024 by 768 Window.
3. Build a small column containing text and a button.
4. Mount that content into the window.
5. Run the application lifecycle.

A fresh App is created every iteration so state, registered windows, and mounted
components do not leak from one startup into the next.

The benchmark includes app.Run because the startup lifecycle is part of the
measured scenario. In a headless or unavailable-display environment, Run may
return without entering a native event loop. That makes this benchmark's result
environment-dependent: native display availability can change what startup
includes.

When comparing results, record whether the benchmark ran with a native display,
headless configuration, or a mocked platform. Do not compare numbers from
different execution modes as though they measured identical work.

This benchmark does not isolate individual costs such as window construction,
component tree creation, layout, or first rendering. Use focused benchmarks for
those questions.

BenchmarkFlexLayout1000Children
-------------------------------

This benchmark measures flex-layout computation for 1,000 vertically arranged
children.

Setup creates a slice of 1,000 FlexChildInput values. Every child has:

- Flex set to zero.
- A measurement callback returning Size(100, 30).

The constraints are tight at 1000 by 30000. The configuration uses vertical
main-axis layout, MainStart alignment, and centered cross-axis alignment.

Setup occurs before b.ResetTimer. The timed operation is therefore:

    layout.ComputeFlex(constraints, cfg, children)

The fixed child measurement result makes the workload deterministic and keeps
the benchmark focused on flex distribution, positioning, and result creation.
It does not measure expensive or variable child measurement logic.

The benchmark is useful for detecting regressions in large list-like layouts.
The chosen 1,000-child workload is intentionally substantial but still small
enough to execute frequently during benchmark calibration.

BenchmarkReactiveStateMutation
------------------------------

This benchmark measures a source-state mutation followed by reading a computed
value:

    val := state.Int(0)
    derived := state.Compute(func() string {
        return fmt.Sprintf("Val: %d", val.Get())
    })

Each timed iteration performs:

1. val.Set(i).
2. derived.Get().

Reading derived is important. It forces the benchmark to include the reactive
invalidation and recomputation path rather than measuring only the setter.
The formatted string also includes the cost of producing the derived value.

The state and computed value are created before ResetTimer and reused through the
benchmark. This represents repeated updates to one live reactive graph rather
than repeated graph construction.

Potential interpretation issue: the loop writes a changing value each time, so
an implementation that caches equal values is not being tested for no-op writes.
A separate benchmark could repeatedly set the same value to measure equality
short-circuit behavior.

BenchmarkVirtualizer100kRows
----------------------------

This benchmark measures visible-range calculation for a virtualized data set of
100,000 rows. The virtualizer uses a row extent of 32 logical units.

The timed call is:

    v.ComputeVisibleRange(scrollOffset, viewportHeight)

The viewport height remains 768. The scroll offset changes by 32 units and wraps
at 10,000 rows using i % 10000. This causes repeated iterations to examine many
positions while avoiding unbounded offset growth during a long benchmark run.

Only range calculation is measured. The benchmark does not construct row
widgets, fetch data, layout visible rows, or render them. This isolates the
virtualizer's arithmetic and boundary logic.

The 100,000-row count primarily tests that the algorithm depends on visible
range and row metrics rather than scanning every row. A good virtualizer should
remain efficient as total row count grows when the viewport remains fixed.

BenchmarkRenderPipelineBatch
----------------------------

This benchmark measures repeated render-command recording for a 500-command
workload.

Before timing, it creates a CommandBuffer and Canvas, then records 500 rounded
rectangles. That initial batch establishes the objects and likely command-slice
capacity.

Each timed iteration:

1. Clears the CommandBuffer.
2. Records 500 filled rectangles through Canvas.FillRect.

Clear retains the command slice's backing storage, so the repeated workload
focuses on clearing, Canvas command construction, coordinate handling, and
append throughput rather than repeated buffer allocation after warm-up.

The initial setup uses rounded rectangles, while the timed body uses ordinary
rectangles. This is intentional in the current source but means setup does not
itself represent the exact timed command type. The measured operation is the
500 FillRect recording pass.

The benchmark does not execute commands in a renderer or measure pixel output.
It measures command generation and buffer reuse only.

Workload Isolation
------------------

The benchmarks use three setup strategies:

- Per-iteration setup for startup behavior.
- One-time setup for fixed layout, reactive, and virtualization inputs.
- One-time object setup plus per-iteration buffer reuse for command recording.

These choices define what each number means. Before changing setup placement,
decide whether the allocation or construction is part of the performance
question.

A benchmark that moves setup outside the timed loop may become faster while no
longer measuring the same user-visible workflow. A benchmark that moves all
setup inside may measure allocation noise instead of the algorithm under study.

Allocation and Garbage Collection
---------------------------------

Go benchmarks can report allocations with commands such as:

    go test ./benchmarks -bench . -benchmem

Allocation counts are especially relevant here because the workloads may create:

- Window and component objects.
- Layout results and temporary slices.
- Formatted strings from reactive computation.
- Command values and slice growth.

Garbage-collection timing can affect results. Run enough iterations for the
benchmark framework to stabilize, and compare multiple runs when investigating
small changes.

Benchmark Environment
---------------------

Record relevant environment details with performance results:

- Go version.
- Operating system and architecture.
- CPU and available cores.
- Whether a native display is available.
- Build tags such as headless mode.
- Compiler flags or race detector usage.
- Whether other workloads are running.

Native application startup is particularly sensitive to display and platform
conditions. Layout, state, virtualization, and command-buffer benchmarks are
more isolated but can still vary with CPU frequency and system load.

Correctness Versus Performance
------------------------------

Benchmarks should not replace unit tests. A benchmark may complete successfully
while producing incorrect layout, state, range, or command results. Keep focused
correctness tests near each package and use benchmark code only to measure the
workload.

When changing an implementation, first confirm correctness, then compare
benchmark results under the same conditions. A faster incorrect result is not a
performance improvement.

Running the Benchmarks
----------------------

Typical commands include:

    go test ./benchmarks -bench .
    go test ./benchmarks -bench BenchmarkFlexLayout1000Children -benchmem
    go test ./benchmarks -bench BenchmarkRenderPipelineBatch -count 5

Use -run '^$' when you want to skip ordinary tests in a package that contains
both tests and benchmarks:

    go test ./benchmarks -run '^$' -bench .

Use a focused benchmark name when investigating one subsystem. Use repeated
runs with -count when comparing small changes, and keep the machine conditions
consistent.

Profiling Guidance
------------------

For CPU or memory investigations, add profiling flags to the Go benchmark
command. Focus first on the benchmark that shows the regression, then inspect
the owning implementation.

Examples of questions these benchmarks can answer:

- Did component startup allocate more after a lifecycle change?
- Did flex layout become slower for large child lists?
- Did derived-state reads begin recomputing unnecessarily?
- Does visible-range calculation remain independent of total row count?
- Did command recording lose buffer reuse or introduce extra allocations?

Benchmark Maintenance
---------------------

When changing a benchmark:

1. Keep its name descriptive and stable when historical comparisons matter.
2. Document what is inside and outside the timed region.
3. Use b.ResetTimer deliberately.
4. Avoid unused results being optimized away; consume returned values as needed.
5. Keep workload sizes representative and explain unusual constants.
6. Separate correctness setup from measured work.
7. Recheck whether native display state affects lifecycle benchmarks.
8. Run benchmark comparisons under matching environments.
9. Add a focused benchmark when one existing benchmark mixes too many costs.
10. Keep correctness assertions in tests rather than benchmark timing loops.

Known Repository Dependency Note
--------------------------------

The benchmark package imports the public application and rendering stack. If a
transitive renderer package is unavailable in the workspace, the benchmark
package may fail during setup before any benchmark runs. That is a repository
build configuration issue, not a benchmark result.

Summary
-------

The benchmark suite measures representative Nova workloads across lifecycle,
layout, reactivity, virtualization, and command recording. Its most important
semantic detail is the timed boundary: startup includes setup by design, while
the other benchmarks prepare stable inputs before ResetTimer.

Use these benchmarks for regression detection and profiling, keep environment
conditions consistent, and pair all performance conclusions with correctness
tests and clear knowledge of which work the benchmark actually includes.
